feat: redo instructions and mentions for SSH (#1878)
platformsh/platformsh-docs: docs/src/development/ssh.md

title: "Using SSH"
weight: 12
description: |

>   Platform.sh uses Secure Shell (SSH) to help keep things secure. You can interact with your deployed environments or use the Platform.sh CLI, and both of these features rely on SSH.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Platform.sh uses Secure Shell (SSH) to help keep your project and applications secure. You can interact with your deployed environments or use the Platform.sh CLI, and both of these features rely on SSH.
```

Are we using things too much in this context?

Author: Yes, very much so.

sidebarTitle: "SSH"
---

{{< description >}}

> This means you can do things like securely log in to your deployed server to troubleshoot and see what's different than your local environment or read logs. And push changes to your Git repository. All secured through SSH.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means you can securely log in to your deployed server to troubleshoot and see what's different than your local environment or read logs. And push changes to your Git repository. All secured through SSH.
```
I guess I'm more OK with things in this context if you do feel they add value as a way to say there are more, so feel free to ditch the comment :)

Author: I didn't like "things", just wanted to keep the idea that there's more. But there has to be a better way to say it. :thinking:

SSH supports authentication with certificates or key pairs. Certificates are faster to set up and generally easier to use, provided you have a web browser available. They are also required for the Platform.sh CLI (unless using an [API token](/development/cli/api-tokens.md)) and when your organization has multifactor authentication set up.

You can use key pairs to access deployed environments if you are setting up an automation tool or prefer that method.

Automation tools may also use [API tokens](/development/cli/api-tokens.md).

> ## Authenticate with certificates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Authenticate with the Platform CLI
```

I think I see these as rather CLI which uses certificates underneath vs SSH Keys, rather than certs vs key pairs @CollierCZ what you do think? this would mean a different set of changes across this page 🤔

Author: I understand what you're saying. From a user perspective, they shouldn't have to really care if it's certificates or what underneath, just that they log in through the CLI. So I could see making that change.

But then I feel like the article isn't about SSH and its entire structure and placement need to be rethought. Right now, it starts as explaining the technology behind the connection to increase the feeling of security. That's why there are the two methods described as they are. If the focus is on user tasks, I'd rename it somehow and rethink it more.

I guess it's a question of the orientation of the docs also in the future. So what do you think of that @MariadeAnton?

Author: Yes, will rewrite it.

To connect using certificates:

1. Install the [Platform.sh CLI](/development/cli/_index.md).
2. Run `platform login`.
4. In the open browser window, log in with your Platform.sh account credentials. (This webpage is encrypted with HTTPS [HTTP over TLS], making it secure.)
5. Authorize the CLI to use your account.

A certificate gets stored in your local SSH configuration. The certificate is automatically cycled every hour for a new certificate as long as your session is active.

If you are inactive for an extended period your certificate expires and you are asked to login again the next time you use a command that requires authentication.

## Authenticate with a key pair

This process requires two keys:

* A **private key** you must keep _secret_
* A **public key** stored in your Platform.sh account

These keys usually look like random lines of characters, like this example of [RSA keys](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RSA_%28cryptosystem%29):

> A private key:

Reviewer: Do we need the example of the private key here? This would generally be stored locally and we don't need access to it either, so it might not be necessary?

Author: I kept it because it was here and because it seemed to be about explaining the method behind the process. But it's probably unnecessary (I wouldn't have added it if it hadn't been there).

```text
-----BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY-----
MIIEowIBAAKCAQEAtpw0S4DwDVj2q04mhiIMkhvrYU7Z6hRiNbTFsqg3X7x/uYS/
dcNrSvT82j/jSeYQP3Dsod9GERW+dmOuLaFNeiqOStZi6jRSWo41hCOWOFbpBum3
...(many more lines like this)...
QGerp3VKaGe0St3ot57GlwCAQUJAf1mit8qDTi0I8MhBe7q2lstXkBvde7GY1gKx
Kng4ohG6xHZ/OvC9tq7/THwAvleaxgLZN5GyXfAqNylDdZ0LtSjl
-----END RSA PRIVATE KEY-----
```

> A public key (one very long line):

Reviewer: I love that we keep the example on the public key, I'd describe it a bit differently, as long as it doesn't require changing the link here:

```suggestion
A public key (ends with your email):
```

Should this content be here or in the section below to identify their public `.pub` key?

Author: I would probably move it down after removing the private key. I would note if it's there, it could be about finding existing keys and there might not necessarily end with an email address.

```

A key pair is valid for as long as you have access to the private key on the system from which you are connecting. If you have a key pair available, you are not prompted to login.

If you used GitHub to sign up for your Platform.sh account, your public keys from GitHub are automatically synced to your Platform.sh account. So you can use them already with the CLI or to [connect to a server](#connect-to-your-server-with-SSH).

Otherwise, you might be able to [find existing keys](#find-your-keys) or else you need to [generate new keys](#generate-new-keys).

### Find your keys

If you use Linux, you probably already have keys. The private key is usually in a file named `~/.ssh/id_rsa` and the public key in `~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub`. Tech Republic has a guide to [finding keys on different systems](https://www.techrepublic.com/article/how-to-view-your-ssh-keys-in-linux-macos-and-windows/).

To find your public key file:

1. Open a terminal.
2. Run the following commands:

   ```bash
   $ cd ~/.ssh
   $ ls -a
   ```

> If you find a file ending in `.pub`, copy the location and [add it to your Platform.sh account](#add-an-ssh-key-to-your-platform-account).

Reviewer: shall we display the command to copy it automatically or is it too complex here?

` pbcopy < ~/.ssh/name_of_the_key.pub`

Author: I think `pbcopy` is exclusive to macOS. I could add in tabs with commands by OS, but that might be too complicated. What do you think?

> If you don't find an existing key, [generate new keys](#generate-new-keys).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to issue a new key or haven't used SSH keys before, [generate new keys](#generate-new-keys).
```

Author: I'm not sure about this change. The point of the section is that they might have keys already available. Is it necessary to suggest they generate new ones if they haven't used them?

### Add an SSH key to your Platform account

> Once you have the location of your public key, add it to your Platform.sh account. This method uses the Platform.sh CLI similar to [authenticating with certificates](#authenticate-with-certificates). You can also add it in the management console, similar to this [video](https://docs.platform.sh/videos/management-console/add-ssh-mc.mp4).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have copied your public key, add it to your Platform.sh account. This method uses the Platform.sh CLI similar to [authenticating with certificates](#authenticate-with-certificates). You can also add it in the management console, similar to this [video](https://docs.platform.sh/videos/management-console/add-ssh-mc.mp4).
```

I'll most likely reverse the order of explanations here, if we look at these as 2 paths one would be: 

SSH Keys + Git + Console

Platform CLI + Git + Console

Author: I'm not sure I understood this, but please check if you think it's still an issue.
